Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the electroencephalogram,
sleep, consciousness and the mechanisms of anaesthesia.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the electroencephalogram and its generation.
The electroencephalogram is the recording of the electrical activity of the brain
from the scalp, and an understanding of what it represents and how it is generated
is the foundation for its use in monitoring the brain and the depth of anaesthesia,
so it is worth describing.
The electroencephalogram, or EEG, is the recording, by electrodes on the scalp,
of the spontaneous electrical activity of the underlying cerebral cortex.
It does not record the action potentials of individual neurons, but the summed,
synchronised electrical activity of large populations of cortical neurons — chiefly
the postsynaptic potentials in the dendrites of the cortical neurons, which,
when many occur together in synchrony,
summate to produce a signal large enough to be detected at the scalp.
The activity is rhythmic, and is described by the frequency and amplitude of its
waves. This synchronised rhythmic activity is driven and paced importantly by the
thalamus, in thalamocortical loops, and modulated by the ascending arousal system.
The degree of synchrony depends on the state of the brain: a desynchronised,
low-amplitude, fast pattern accompanies the alert, active state,
while a synchronised, high-amplitude, slow pattern accompanies drowsiness,
sleep and anaesthesia.
So the electroencephalogram records, from the scalp,
the summed synchronised postsynaptic activity of populations of cortical neurons,
paced by thalamocortical loops and modulated by the arousal system;
described by the frequency and amplitude of its waves,
which become fast and low-amplitude in the alert state and slow and high-amplitude
with drowsiness, sleep and anaesthesia — the basis of its use in monitoring the
brain.
Describe the frequency bands of the electroencephalogram and what they signify.
The electroencephalogram is conventionally described in terms of frequency bands,
each associated with particular states,
and knowing these is useful for interpreting the trace and the effects of
anaesthesia upon it. The activity is divided into bands by frequency.
The beta rhythm, the fastest, above around thirteen cycles per second,
is of low amplitude and accompanies the alert, awake,
mentally active state — a desynchronised pattern.
The alpha rhythm, around eight to thirteen cycles per second,
is seen in the awake but relaxed state with the eyes closed,
prominent over the back of the head. The theta rhythm,
around four to eight cycles per second, appears in drowsiness and light sleep,
and in children.
The delta rhythm, the slowest, below around four cycles per second,
is of high amplitude and accompanies deep sleep, and, in the waking adult,
indicates a pathological state or deep anaesthesia.
In general, as the brain passes from alertness through drowsiness and sleep to deep
anaesthesia or coma, the dominant activity slows and increases in amplitude — from
beta, through alpha and theta, to delta — reflecting the increasing
synchronisation; very deep anaesthesia may produce burst suppression and then an
isoelectric trace.
So the electroencephalogram bands are beta,
the fast low-amplitude rhythm of the alert state; alpha,
of relaxed wakefulness with eyes closed; theta, of drowsiness; and delta,
the slow high-amplitude rhythm of deep sleep, and, in the waking adult,
of pathology or deep anaesthesia; the activity progressively slowing and growing as
the brain is depressed — a framework for interpreting the trace and the effects of
anaesthesia.
Page of Anaesthesia 2 EXAMINER: Describe the stages of sleep.
Sleep is not a uniform state but a structured,
cyclical process with distinct stages, defined largely by the electroencephalogram,
and an understanding of its architecture is worth having,
both physiologically and for its relevance to anaesthesia and to sleep disorders.
Sleep is divided into two fundamentally different kinds.
Non-rapid-eye-movement sleep, which makes up most of sleep,
is divided into stages of increasing depth, from light sleep, through to deep,
slow-wave sleep; as it deepens, the electroencephalogram slows and increases in
amplitude, from theta to delta activity, and the body's functions — heart rate,
blood pressure, breathing — slow and become regular, the muscles relax somewhat,
and arousal becomes harder.
This is restful, restorative sleep.
Rapid-eye-movement sleep, by contrast, is a quite different state:
the electroencephalogram becomes fast and desynchronised, resembling wakefulness;
the eyes move rapidly; dreaming occurs; and, strikingly,
the skeletal muscles are profoundly relaxed, almost paralysed,
except for the breathing and eye muscles.
Through the night, sleep cycles between these, in cycles of around ninety minutes,
with deep slow-wave sleep predominating early and rapid-eye-movement sleep later.
So sleep is structured into non-rapid-eye-movement sleep — progressing through
stages of increasing depth to slow-wave sleep,
with a slowing electroencephalogram and reduced bodily functions,
restful and restorative — and rapid-eye-movement sleep, with a fast,
waking-like electroencephalogram, rapid eye movements,
dreaming and near-paralysis of the muscles;
the two cycling through the night — a structured architecture relevant to
physiology and anaesthesia.
Describe the neural control of sleep and wakefulness.
The alternation between sleep and wakefulness is actively controlled by systems in
the brainstem and hypothalamus, and an understanding of this control is important,
as it underlies the regulation of consciousness on which anaesthesia acts.
Wakefulness is maintained by the ascending arousal system:
the groups of neurons in the brainstem and hypothalamus — the monoaminergic,
cholinergic and other systems, including the histaminergic and the orexin neurons —
which project widely to activate the cortex and thalamus, maintaining the aroused,
conscious, waking state.
Sleep is not merely the absence of this arousal,
but is actively promoted by sleep-promoting centres,
particularly in the hypothalamus, which inhibit the arousal system.
The switch between sleep and wakefulness is thought to operate like a
mutually-inhibiting circuit — the arousal and sleep-promoting systems inhibiting
each other, producing a stable switch into one state or the other.
The timing of sleep is governed by two influences: a homeostatic drive,
the pressure to sleep that builds with time awake; and a circadian rhythm,
the daily cycle driven by the body clock in the hypothalamus,
entrained to the light-dark cycle.
The transitions between the sleep stages and rapid-eye-movement sleep are
controlled by brainstem systems.
So wakefulness is maintained by the ascending arousal system — the monoaminergic,
cholinergic, histaminergic and orexin neurons activating the cortex — while sleep
is actively promoted by hypothalamic centres inhibiting it,
the two forming a mutually-inhibiting switch;
the timing set by a homeostatic sleep drive and the circadian clock — an active
control of sleep and wakefulness underlying the regulation of consciousness.
Describe the physiological basis of consciousness.
Consciousness is a difficult concept,
but its physiological basis can be considered in terms of the brain systems
necessary for it, and this is directly relevant to anaesthesia,
whose central aim is the reversible abolition of consciousness,
so it is worth addressing.
Consciousness may be considered to have two aspects: arousal,
or wakefulness — the level of consciousness,
being awake rather than asleep Page of Anaesthesia 3 or comatose;
and awareness — the content of consciousness,
the experience of oneself and the environment.
The two depend on different but interacting systems.
Arousal depends on the ascending arousal system of the brainstem and its
projections, through the thalamus, to the cortex;
its activity maintains the wakeful state, and its damage causes coma.
Awareness — the content — depends on the cerebral cortex and its integrated
activity, particularly the widespread,
coordinated interaction between cortical regions,
and the thalamocortical system that supports it.
Current understanding emphasises that consciousness depends not on any single
centre but on the integrated activity of widespread,
interconnected cortical and thalamic networks — the integration of information
across the brain. This is the substrate that anaesthesia disrupts.
So consciousness comprises arousal — wakefulness,
depending on the ascending arousal system and thalamocortical projections — and
awareness — its content, depending on the integrated activity of widespread
cortical and thalamic networks; consciousness arising not from a single centre but
from the integration of information across interconnected networks — the substrate
whose disruption is the aim of general anaesthesia.
Describe the mechanisms of action of general anaesthesia.
The mechanism by which general anaesthetics produce their effects — the reversible
loss of consciousness and of the responses to surgery — has long been studied,
and although not completely understood, much is now known,
so it is worth setting out the current understanding.
General anaesthesia is not a single effect but a collection — unconsciousness,
amnesia, immobility, and the suppression of responses — which may be produced by
actions at different sites.
The older, unitary theories, based on the correlation of anaesthetic potency with
lipid solubility — the Meyer-Overton correlation — suggested a non-specific action
on the lipid of the cell membranes;
but it is now thought that anaesthetics act chiefly by binding to specific protein
targets — particularly ion channels and receptors — modulating synaptic
transmission and neuronal excitability.
The principal molecular targets are: the enhancement of inhibitory transmission,
chiefly through the GABA-A receptor,
which most intravenous and volatile agents potentiate — the major action of many
agents; and the inhibition of excitatory transmission,
including the blockade of the NMDA glutamate receptor,
the chief action of ketamine, nitrous oxide and xenon;
with actions on other channels.
Through these molecular actions, anaesthetics depress the function of the neural
systems of consciousness — the thalamocortical and cortical networks and the
arousal systems — producing unconsciousness,
and act in the spinal cord to produce immobility.
So general anaesthesia, a collection of effects,
is produced chiefly by actions on specific protein targets — enhancing GABA-A
inhibition, the major action of many agents,
and inhibiting excitation including the NMDA receptor,
the action of ketamine and nitrous oxide;
thereby depressing the thalamocortical and arousal systems of consciousness and
acting in the cord for immobility — the current understanding,
replacing the older lipid theories, of how anaesthesia works.
Describe the monitoring of the depth of anaesthesia.
Monitoring the depth of anaesthesia — ensuring the patient is adequately but not
excessively anaesthetised — is important, particularly to avoid awareness,
and several approaches are used, including those derived from the
electroencephalogram, so an outline is worth giving.
The aim is to assess the level of anaesthesia,
to avoid both inadequate anaesthesia, with the risk of awareness,
and excessive depth. Several approaches are used.
Clinical signs — the responses of the patient, such as movement,
and the autonomic signs of inadequate anaesthesia,
such as a rising heart rate and blood pressure,
sweating and lacrimation — are the traditional guide, though imperfect,
and unreliable when Page of Anaesthesia 4 neuromuscular blockers prevent movement.
The concentration of the anaesthetic agent is monitored,
particularly the end-tidal concentration of the volatile agents,
which reflects the brain concentration and is related to the probability of
awareness through the concept of the minimum alveolar concentration.
Processed electroencephalographic monitors analyse the electroencephalogram,
which changes characteristically with anaesthetic depth,
and derive an index intended to reflect the depth — such as the bispectral index
and others; these provide a guide, though with limitations.
So the depth of anaesthesia is monitored by clinical signs — movement and autonomic
responses, imperfect and unreliable under neuromuscular blockade;
by the end-tidal anaesthetic concentration,
related to the minimum alveolar concentration;
and by processed electroencephalographic monitors, such as the bispectral index,
deriving an index of depth from the electroencephalogram — approaches to ensuring
adequate anaesthesia and avoiding awareness, each with limitations.
Pull it together: how does the physiology of consciousness underlie anaesthesia and
its monitoring?
I would draw it together around general anaesthesia as the deliberate,
reversible manipulation of the very systems that the physiology of consciousness
identifies, monitored through the signs of their depression.
Consciousness, we have seen, depends on arousal — maintained by the ascending
arousal system and its thalamocortical projections — and on awareness, the content,
depending on the integrated activity of widespread cortical and thalamic networks.
Natural sleep is the physiological reduction of consciousness,
actively controlled by the balance of arousal and sleep-promoting systems.
General anaesthesia abolishes consciousness by acting,
through specific molecular targets — chiefly enhancing GABA-A inhibition and
inhibiting excitatory transmission — to depress these same systems:
suppressing the arousal system and, importantly,
disrupting the integrated thalamocortical and cortical activity that constitutes
awareness.
The electroencephalogram, which reflects the synchronised cortical activity,
changes characteristically as these systems are depressed — slowing and
synchronising — and so provides, through processed monitors,
a means of gauging the depth of anaesthesia and guarding against awareness.
So the physiology of consciousness — arousal from the brainstem systems and
awareness from integrated thalamocortical networks — is the substrate that
anaesthesia depresses, through its molecular actions enhancing inhibition and
reducing excitation; and the electroencephalogram,
reflecting the state of these systems,
underlies the monitoring of anaesthetic depth — the physiology of consciousness
directly underlying both the action and the monitoring of anaesthesia.
Describe burst suppression and the isoelectric electroencephalogram.
As anaesthesia is deepened beyond the level needed for surgery,
the electroencephalogram passes through the characteristic patterns of burst
suppression and then an isoelectric trace,
and understanding these is important in the use of deep anaesthesia for cerebral
protection and in monitoring.
As the depth of anaesthesia increases,
the electroencephalogram progressively slows and increases in amplitude.
With further deepening, it enters burst suppression:
a pattern in which periods of electrical activity — bursts — alternate with periods
of electrical silence — suppression; as anaesthesia deepens further,
the bursts become less frequent and the silent periods longer.
With still greater depth, the activity ceases altogether, giving an isoelectric,
or flat, electroencephalogram — a complete suppression of the cortical electrical
activity. These deep patterns are significant.
They represent a profound depression of cerebral electrical activity and so of the
cerebral metabolic rate associated with it:
at burst suppression and isoelectricity, the metabolic rate is greatly reduced,
which is the basis of the use of deep anaesthesia, titrated to burst suppression,
for cerebral protection during periods of ischaemic risk,
since the reduced metabolism increases the brain's tolerance.
Burst suppression is also used as an endpoint in the treatment of refractory raised
intracranial pressure and status epilepticus.
Page of Anaesthesia 5 An isoelectric trace must, however,
be distinguished from that caused by cerebral injury or death.
So as anaesthesia deepens, the electroencephalogram passes into burst suppression —
bursts of activity alternating with silence,
the silence lengthening with depth — and then an isoelectric, flat trace;
these representing a profound reduction of cerebral electrical activity and
metabolic rate, used, titrated to burst suppression,
for cerebral protection and in treating refractory raised intracranial pressure and
status epilepticus — deep patterns important in anaesthesia.
Describe the processed electroencephalogram and the bispectral index,
with their limitations.
The raw electroencephalogram is complex and difficult to interpret in real time,
so processed electroencephalographic monitors have been developed to give a simple
index of anaesthetic depth, of which the bispectral index is the best known;
understanding their basis and limitations is important for their proper use.
The raw electroencephalogram changes characteristically with anaesthetic depth —
slowing and increasing in amplitude — but interpreting it continuously is
impractical for the anaesthetist.
Processed monitors analyse the electroencephalogram automatically and derive from
it a single number intended to reflect the depth of anaesthesia.
The bispectral index processes the electroencephalogram by a proprietary algorithm
to produce a number from a hundred, fully awake, down towards zero,
deeply anaesthetised, with a target range for surgical anaesthesia;
other similar monitors exist.
These can guide the titration of anaesthesia and may reduce the risk of awareness
and of excessive depth. However, they have important limitations.
The index is derived empirically and does not measure consciousness directly;
it lags behind real-time changes; it is affected and confounded by other factors —
electrical interference, muscle activity, and certain drugs; and, crucially,
it is not reliable for all anaesthetic agents — it was derived chiefly for the
GABA-acting agents and is unreliable for agents such as ketamine and nitrous oxide,
which may not reduce the index despite producing anaesthesia.
So they are a guide, not an absolute measure.
So processed monitors such as the bispectral index analyse the electroencephalogram
to give a single number reflecting anaesthetic depth,
guiding titration and helping to avoid awareness and excessive depth;
but they are empirical and indirect, lag behind changes,
are confounded by interference and drugs,
and are unreliable for agents such as ketamine and nitrous oxide — a useful guide
with important limitations.
Describe the circadian rhythm and the role of melatonin.
The timing of sleep and of many other bodily functions is governed by an internal
daily rhythm — the circadian rhythm — driven by a body clock,
in which the hormone melatonin plays a part,
and an understanding of this is worth having,
with its relevance to sleep disturbance.
The circadian rhythm is the roughly twenty-four-hour cycle in many physiological
functions — sleep and wakefulness, body temperature,
hormone secretion and others — generated internally by a biological clock.
The master clock lies in a small region of the hypothalamus,
the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which generates a self-sustaining rhythm of close to
twenty-four hours; this is entrained, or synchronised,
to the actual day by external cues, chiefly the light-dark cycle,
the clock receiving information about light directly from the eyes.
The clock drives the daily rhythms, including the timing of sleep, by its outputs.
Melatonin is a hormone secreted by the pineal gland,
under the control of the clock, in a daily rhythm: it is secreted at night,
in darkness, and suppressed by light,
so it acts as a signal of darkness and of biological night,
and is involved in the regulation and the timing of sleep.
The circadian system explains the daily timing of sleepiness,
and its disturbance — as in jet lag, shift work,
and some sleep disorders — causes problems;
melatonin is used to influence the timing of sleep.
So the circadian rhythm is the internally-generated Page of Anaesthesia 6 daily
cycle of sleep, temperature, hormones and other functions,
driven by the suprachiasmatic clock in the hypothalamus and entrained to the day by
light; with melatonin, secreted by the pineal at night and suppressed by light,
signalling biological night and helping to time sleep — a system whose disturbance
causes jet lag and shift-work problems, of relevance to sleep disturbance.
Describe the functions of sleep and the effects of sleep deprivation.
Sleep occupies a large part of life and is clearly essential,
yet its functions are still not fully understood,
and an outline of the proposed functions,
and of the effects of being deprived of sleep, is worth giving.
That sleep is essential is shown by its universality, by the strong drive to sleep,
and by the serious effects of its deprivation.
Several, not mutually exclusive, functions are proposed.
A restorative function: sleep, particularly the deep slow-wave sleep,
is thought to allow the restoration of the body and brain — the replenishment of
energy stores, the repair of tissues, and, as recently proposed,
the clearance of metabolic waste from the brain by the glymphatic system.
A function in memory and learning: sleep, including rapid-eye-movement sleep,
is important in the consolidation of memory and in learning,
the experiences of the day being processed and consolidated during sleep.
A function in the regulation of metabolism,
the immune system and many other processes.
The effects of sleep deprivation demonstrate its importance:
even short-term deprivation impairs attention, concentration, mood,
judgement and performance, and the immune and metabolic functions;
severe or chronic deprivation has serious effects on health and cognition.
So sleep, though its functions are incompletely understood,
is proposed to serve restoration — of energy,
tissues and the clearance of brain waste — the consolidation of memory and
learning, and the regulation of metabolism and immunity;
its deprivation impairing attention, mood, judgement and performance, and,
when severe, health and cognition — demonstrating that sleep is essential,
with relevance to the sleep disruption of illness and of the perioperative period.
Describe obstructive sleep apnoea and its relevance to anaesthesia.
Obstructive sleep apnoea is a common sleep disorder of considerable importance to
the anaesthetist, and its understanding follows from the physiology of sleep and of
the airway, so it is worth describing.
Obstructive sleep apnoea is a disorder in which the upper airway repeatedly
obstructs during sleep, causing repeated interruptions of breathing.
The mechanism is that, during sleep,
the tone of the muscles that hold the upper airway open is reduced — part of the
normal reduction of muscle tone in sleep — and in susceptible people,
particularly those with a narrow or crowded upper airway, as in obesity,
the airway collapses and obstructs;
the resulting hypoxia and the effort to breathe cause a brief arousal,
which restores the tone and the airway,
after which sleep resumes and the cycle repeats, many times a night.
The consequences include the fragmentation of sleep, causing daytime sleepiness,
and the repeated hypoxia, contributing to cardiovascular disease.
Its relevance to anaesthesia is considerable:
these patients are often difficult to manage — they may have a difficult airway;
they are highly sensitive to the respiratory-depressant and airway-relaxing effects
of anaesthetic and sedative drugs and opioids, which worsen the obstruction;
and they are at risk of airway obstruction and hypoxia in the perioperative period,
particularly after surgery.
So obstructive sleep apnoea is the repeated obstruction of the upper airway during
sleep, from the sleep-related loss of airway muscle tone in a susceptible,
often obese, airway, causing repeated hypoxia and arousals,
with daytime sleepiness and cardiovascular consequences;
of great relevance to anaesthesia because of the difficult airway,
the heightened sensitivity to respiratory depressants and opioids,
and the perioperative risk of obstruction and hypoxia — a common disorder following
from the physiology of sleep and the airway.
Page of Anaesthesia 7 EXAMINER: Describe the Meyer-Overton correlation and the
modern understanding of anaesthetic targets.
The history of the theories of how anaesthetics work centres on the Meyer-Overton
correlation and its eventual replacement by the protein-target theory,
and understanding this development clarifies the modern view of anaesthetic
mechanisms.
Around the turn of the twentieth century,
Meyer and Overton independently observed a striking correlation:
the potency of an anaesthetic agent correlates closely with its lipid solubility —
the more lipid-soluble the agent, the lower the concentration needed to produce
anaesthesia — across a wide range of agents.
This correlation suggested that anaesthetics act by dissolving in the lipid of the
cell membranes, and that anaesthesia results from some non-specific disturbance of
the membrane — the lipid theory. This view dominated for many years.
However, it has since been largely replaced.
Several observations were difficult to reconcile with a purely lipid action,
and it is now thought that anaesthetics act chiefly by binding directly to specific
protein targets — ion channels and receptors — modulating their function.
The correlation with lipid solubility is now explained by the lipophilic
anaesthetic molecules binding to hydrophobic pockets within these membrane proteins
— so lipid solubility determines access to the binding site,
not a non-specific lipid action.
The principal protein targets are the ligand-gated ion channels,
particularly the GABA-A and the NMDA receptors.
So the Meyer-Overton correlation — the close correlation of anaesthetic potency
with lipid solubility — long suggested a non-specific lipid action on the membrane;
but the modern understanding is that anaesthetics act by binding specific protein
targets — ion channels and receptors such as the GABA-A and NMDA receptors — the
lipid-solubility correlation reflecting the lipophilic access to hydrophobic
binding pockets, not a lipid action — the development from the lipid theory to the
protein-target theory.
Describe the concept of minimum alveolar concentration.
The minimum alveolar concentration is the standard measure of the potency of the
volatile anaesthetic agents, and it is a concept of central practical importance,
allowing the agents to be compared and dosed, so it is worth describing.
The minimum alveolar concentration, abbreviated MAC,
is defined as the alveolar concentration of a volatile anaesthetic agent,
at equilibrium, at which fifty per cent of subjects do not move in response to a
standard surgical stimulus — a skin incision.
It is, in effect, a measure of the potency of the agent:
a more potent agent has a lower minimum alveolar concentration.
The alveolar concentration is used because, at equilibrium,
it reflects the partial pressure of the agent in the brain,
which determines its effect, and because it can be measured continuously as the
end-tidal concentration.
The value provides a common scale for comparing and dosing the agents,
and doses are expressed as multiples of it.
The concept is useful in several ways:
the responses to other endpoints are expressed as fractions or multiples of the
standard value — for instance, a lower multiple suppresses awareness,
and movement at incision corresponds to one.
The value is altered by many factors — reduced by age, hypothermia,
other depressant drugs and pregnancy, and increased by youth and other factors.
So the minimum alveolar concentration is the alveolar concentration of a volatile
agent at which half of subjects do not move to a skin incision — a measure of
potency, the more potent agent having the lower value;
based on the alveolar concentration reflecting the brain partial pressure and
measurable as the end-tidal concentration;
providing a common scale for comparing and dosing the agents, and altered by age,
temperature, other drugs and pregnancy — a concept of central practical importance.
Describe amnesia and the effect of anaesthesia on memory.
Page of Anaesthesia 8 CANDIDATE: Amnesia — the prevention of memory formation — is
one of the components of anaesthesia, and an important one,
and understanding the effect of anaesthetic agents on memory is worth having,
as it bears on awareness and on the use of these drugs.
Memory is not a single process: a distinction is drawn between the explicit,
or conscious, memory of facts and events,
and the implicit memory that operates without conscious awareness;
and between the registration, the consolidation and the recall of memories.
Anaesthetic and sedative agents have a powerful effect on memory,
suppressing the formation of new memories — anterograde amnesia — often at
concentrations lower than those needed to abolish consciousness;
so amnesia occurs before, and outlasts,
the loss of consciousness as the dose is changed.
This is important: it means that, at light planes of anaesthesia,
a patient may be conscious and responsive yet form no memory of it,
so that the absence of recall does not prove that there was no awareness at the
time.
The amnesic effect is exploited by the use of agents such as the benzodiazepines,
given to ensure that no memory is formed. The agents act on the systems of memory,
including those of the temporal lobe.
So anaesthesia includes amnesia — the suppression of the formation of new,
explicit memories — produced by the anaesthetic and sedative agents,
often at lower concentrations than those abolishing consciousness,
so that a patient may be conscious yet amnesic,
and the absence of recall does not prove the absence of awareness;
the amnesic effect being exploited with agents such as the benzodiazepines — an
important component of anaesthesia bearing on awareness.
Describe the distinction between the GABA-acting and the NMDA-antagonist
anaesthetic agents.
The anaesthetic agents may be broadly divided,
by their principal molecular mechanism,
into those acting chiefly by enhancing GABA inhibition and those acting chiefly by
antagonising the NMDA receptor, and this distinction is useful,
since the two groups differ in their effects, so it is worth describing.
Most of the commonly-used general anaesthetic agents act chiefly by enhancing
inhibitory transmission at the GABA-A receptor: the intravenous agents propofol,
the barbiturates and etomidate, and the volatile inhalational agents,
all potentiate the GABA-A receptor,
increasing inhibition and so depressing the brain;
this is the dominant mechanism of this large group.
A second, smaller group acts chiefly by antagonising the excitatory NMDA glutamate
receptor: ketamine, nitrous oxide and xenon block the NMDA receptor,
reducing excitation. The two groups differ in their effects.
The GABA-acting agents tend to produce the typical pattern — a smooth loss of
consciousness, with the electroencephalographic slowing on which the depth monitors
are based, and they reduce the cerebral metabolic rate and blood flow.
The NMDA antagonists, particularly ketamine,
produce a different state — ketamine causing a dissociative anaesthesia,
with analgesia, often maintained cardiovascular and respiratory function,
but a different electroencephalographic pattern that does not reduce the
depth-monitor indices, and it tends to increase the cerebral metabolic rate.
So the anaesthetic agents divide into the GABA-enhancing group — propofol,
the barbiturates, etomidate and the volatiles — producing the typical anaesthesia
with electroencephalographic slowing and reduced cerebral metabolism;
and the NMDA-antagonist group — ketamine,
nitrous oxide and xenon — with different effects,
ketamine producing a dissociative anaesthesia not reflected in the depth monitors
and increasing cerebral metabolism;
a distinction useful for understanding the agents' differing effects.
Describe the electroencephalographic changes in epilepsy and seizures.
The electroencephalogram is the principal investigation of epilepsy,
and its characteristic changes follow from the abnormal,
excessive and synchronised neuronal activity that underlies seizures,
Page of Anaesthesia 9 so they are worth describing.
Epilepsy is a tendency to recurrent seizures, which are episodes of abnormal,
excessive and hypersynchronous electrical activity of populations of cortical
neurons.
Because the electroencephalogram records exactly this — the synchronised activity
of cortical neurons — it is well suited to detecting the abnormal activity of
epilepsy.
During a seizure, the electroencephalogram shows characteristic abnormal patterns,
reflecting the excessive synchronised discharge: high-amplitude,
rhythmic or spiking activity, the pattern depending on the type of seizure.
In a generalised seizure, the abnormal activity involves the whole cortex from the
outset, giving widespread, synchronised abnormal discharges; in a focal seizure,
it begins in one region, with localised abnormal activity that may then spread.
Between seizures, the electroencephalogram may show interictal abnormalities — such
as spikes or sharp waves — indicating the epileptic tendency, useful in diagnosis.
The electroencephalogram thus helps to diagnose epilepsy,
to classify the seizure type, and to localise a focus.
It is also used to detect non-convulsive seizures and status epilepticus,
in which seizure activity continues without obvious convulsion,
recognisable only on the electroencephalogram.
So the electroencephalogram in epilepsy shows the abnormal, excessive,
synchronised activity of seizures — high-amplitude rhythmic and spiking discharges,
generalised or focal — with interictal spikes between seizures;
used to diagnose epilepsy, classify and localise seizures,
and detect non-convulsive status — changes following from the synchronised neuronal
activity the electroencephalogram records.
Describe the electroencephalographic changes with hypoxia,
ischaemia and hypothermia.
The electroencephalogram is sensitive to the adequacy of the brain's oxygen and
substrate supply and to its temperature, and the changes it shows with hypoxia,
ischaemia and hypothermia are the basis of its use in monitoring the brain at risk,
so they are worth describing.
Because the electrical activity of the cortex depends on an adequate supply of
oxygen and glucose, the electroencephalogram is affected when this supply is
threatened.
With cerebral hypoxia or ischaemia, as the oxygen delivery falls,
the electroencephalogram slows progressively — the activity becoming slower and,
eventually, of reduced amplitude — and, if the ischaemia is severe,
the trace flattens towards isoelectricity as the neuronal activity fails;
these changes occur at the threshold of functional failure, before the cells die,
so the electroencephalogram gives warning of inadequate flow in time to act.
This is the basis of its use in detecting cerebral ischaemia — for instance,
during carotid surgery, when the blood supply may be interrupted.
Hypothermia also slows the electroencephalogram,
the activity slowing progressively as the brain is cooled,
passing through burst suppression and, at deep hypothermia,
becoming isoelectric — reflecting the reduction of the cerebral metabolic rate by
cold, and used to confirm the metabolic suppression during deep hypothermic
procedures.
So the electroencephalogram slows, and then flattens,
with cerebral hypoxia and ischaemia,
as the failing oxygen supply impairs the neuronal activity — giving warning of
inadequate flow, used in carotid surgery; and it slows similarly with hypothermia,
passing to burst suppression and isoelectricity as cooling reduces the metabolic
rate — changes underlying its use in monitoring the brain at risk.
Describe the thalamocortical system and its role in consciousness and anaesthesia.
The thalamus, and its connections with the cortex — the thalamocortical system — is
increasingly seen as central to consciousness and to the action of anaesthesia,
and an understanding of its role draws together the physiology of consciousness,
so it is worth describing.
The thalamus is the great relay through which almost all sensory information,
and much other information, passes on its way to the cortex;
but it is more than a relay, being reciprocally and richly connected with the
cortex in Page of Anaesthesia 10 thalamocortical loops,
and it is involved in regulating the activity and the state of the cortex.
The thalamocortical system is thought to be important in consciousness in two ways:
the thalamus, through its relay and its loops,
is essential to the transmission and integration of information to and across the
cortex; and the thalamocortical system generates and shapes the rhythms of cortical
activity, including those of arousal and sleep,
switching between the patterns of wakefulness and of sleep.
Current theories of consciousness emphasise the integrated activity of the
thalamocortical system — the coordinated interaction of the thalamus and the
widespread cortical regions — as the substrate of conscious awareness.
Anaesthesia is thought to act importantly on this system:
by depressing the thalamus and disrupting the thalamocortical integration and the
cortical communication, anaesthetics interrupt the integrated activity necessary
for consciousness — a thalamocortical switch into the unconscious state.
So the thalamocortical system — the thalamus and its reciprocal loops with the
cortex — relays and integrates information to the cortex and generates the rhythms
of arousal and sleep; its integrated activity being regarded as central to
conscious awareness, and anaesthesia acting importantly by depressing the thalamus
and disrupting the thalamocortical integration — a system central to consciousness
and to the action of anaesthesia.
Describe paradoxical excitation during the induction of anaesthesia.
During the induction of anaesthesia with some agents,
a phase of excitation may paradoxically occur before the depression of
consciousness, and understanding this paradoxical excitation is worth having,
as it is a recognised phenomenon of importance during induction.
One might expect anaesthetic agents, which depress the brain, to produce a smooth,
progressive depression; but during induction, particularly with some agents,
a transient phase of excitation — increased movement,
sometimes with involuntary movements,
and increased activity — may occur before the patient settles into anaesthesia.
This paradoxical excitation is thought to arise because the anaesthetic,
at the light concentrations early in induction,
first depresses the inhibitory systems — or particular inhibitory neurons — before
it depresses the excitatory ones; the early loss of inhibition releases,
or disinhibits, other neurons, producing a transient net increase in activity and
the excitation, until the deepening anaesthesia depresses these too and
consciousness is lost.
A similar disinhibition is described historically in the classical stages of ether
anaesthesia, as a stage of excitement between the initial analgesia and the
surgical anaesthesia.
The phenomenon is of practical importance during induction,
when the excitation must be managed and not mistaken for light anaesthesia
requiring stimulation.
So paradoxical excitation is a transient phase of increased movement and activity
during the induction of anaesthesia,
arising because the agent first depresses inhibitory neurons,
disinhibiting others and transiently increasing activity,
before the deepening anaesthesia depresses these too and consciousness is lost;
corresponding to the classical stage of excitement — a recognised phenomenon of
practical importance during induction.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The EEG records, from the scalp,
the summed synchronised postsynaptic activity of populations of cortical neurons
(not individual action potentials),
paced by thalamocortical loops and modulated by the arousal system;
it becomes fast/low-amplitude in alertness and slow/high-amplitude with drowsiness,
sleep and anaesthesia.
Second, Frequency bands: beta (>~13 Hz, alert/active), alpha (~8-13 Hz,
relaxed wakefulness, eyes closed), theta (~4-8 Hz, drowsiness), delta (<~4 Hz,
deep sleep — or, in the waking adult, pathology/deep anaesthesia).
Activity slows and grows as the brain is depressed;
very deep anaesthesia → burst suppression → isoelectric.
Third, Wakefulness is maintained by the ascending arousal system (monoaminergic,
cholinergic, histaminergic, orexin neurons activating cortex/thalamus);
sleep is actively promoted by hypothalamic centres inhibiting it — a
mutually-inhibiting switch, timed by a homeostatic sleep drive and the circadian
clock.
Consciousness = arousal (brainstem arousal system + thalamocortical projections) +
awareness (integrated activity of widespread cortical/thalamic networks).
Fourth, General anaesthesia (unconsciousness, amnesia,
immobility) acts chiefly on specific protein targets — enhancing GABA-A inhibition
(most IV/volatile agents) and inhibiting excitation incl.
the NMDA receptor (ketamine, nitrous oxide,
xenon) — depressing the thalamocortical/arousal systems of consciousness (and the
cord for immobility); the older Meyer-Overton lipid theory is superseded.
Depth is monitored by clinical/autonomic signs (unreliable under blockade),
end-tidal agent concentration (MAC), and processed EEG monitors (e.g.
bispectral index) — to avoid awareness.
Thank you. That concludes the station.